---
slug: hello-world
title: Hello World
author: bhelx
author_url: https://github.com/bhelx
author_image_url: https://github.com/bhelx.png?size=200
tags: []
---

Welcome to the nolabase! I'd like to start this blog by writing about the motivation behind this project. 
Hopefully, it can be a helpful introduction as well as a lodestar for the contributors moving forward.

## How We Got Here

As long as I've been programming professionally, I've been using my free time and knowledge to help
with projects that I think are beneficial to the city of New Orleans. Although I wasn't aware of it at
the time, this type of advocacy is loosely known as "civic hacking". This is what led to people coming together
and forming [Code For New Orleans](http://codeforneworleans.org/). 

Along the way I've worked with people doing a diverse amount of work in fields like
journalism, crime, taxes, housing affordability, public transportation, city governance, government
accountability, etc.

The work I do generally involves building tools or helping with data analysis. The one constant problem I encounter
is using and understanding public data. Here in New Orleans, we are fairly
lucky to have some quality sources of public data in machine-readable form. However, it was not
always that way, and it's still far from perfect. Even with good data, I started to notice something that was missing.
I found that nearly every project I worked on had a number of barriers to entry.

## The Problem

In each project, the primary barriers to entry were around extracting the data (esp. if it's not in a machine-readble
form) and transforming and loading all the unique datasources into a tool for analysis. I noticed
that everyone who is doing this across the city is essentially doing this work over and over again
in silos. And when they finish their analysis, they have a unique and complicated set
of steps to reproduce the results. My idea was to solve all of these problems once time, as a community,
and then let the community worry about the parts they actually care about (doing analysis and building helpful
apps and tools).

## Nolabase

The nolabase is a community-shared [Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/) database that contains all
known public information about the city. The data is already clean and always kept up to date by the community.
And combining sources of data is as simple as performing a [SQL join](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Join_(SQL)) across 
as many tables as you want. Querying the data involves writing a [SQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL) query
which makes sharing very easy. This means reproducing someone's results, or copying and modifying their analysis
for your own purposes, is very easy. And since many tools speak SQL, you aren't necessarily locked into using
the nolabase and writing SQL directly. It also operates as as a nice platform for building tools by offloading
the complicated data integrity and computation problems to our team.

## Goals

Although the nolabase is a tool, our focus is on the community around it. The nolabase provides
the community with an **interface** to agree on which enables us to work together and help each other.
We hope that we never have to solve these problems alone again.


